Good afternoon, my name is Irina Ivanovna Skryabogatykh. I am a lecturer in the marketing department of the Russian Economic Academy of Neplekhanovo, which is known for preparing quite successful and in demand on the market of the work of marketers.
In addition, since 2004 I have been editing the first professional magazine called Marketing and Marketing Research, published by the Grebennikov Publishing House.
This magazine allows readers and professionals to familiarize themselves with the advanced experience of successful marketing research projects in Russia, both by international companies,
as well as by our domestic companies and organizations for the production of consumer goods, goods recommended and addressed to corporations, as well as goods that cannot be touched, that is, services.
Today we will get acquainted with a discipline that is a continuation of the courses of the basis of marketing, strategic marketing, which is necessary to understand the importance, the need to collect, analyze, interpret market information for making management decisions.
This discipline is called marketing research. It is a well-constructed and logical concept, theory of conducting marketing research, conducting marketing research projects.
At the same time, this discipline has certain examples in each section, which are implemented both on the Russian market and on the international market by various manufacturers of goods and services.
We all live in a changing world, we all live in uncertain conditions, probabilities, because no one knows what will happen in the near future on the market.
The same way, companies that produce goods and services often do not think about their success until there is a market problem. For example, sales are reduced, or consumers suddenly stop buying your product because there is a product of competitors.
The product of competitors offers a specific feature, which in marketing is called a competitive advantage. What happened to our consumers? How did they understand and decide that the product of competitors, which is sold at a price higher than our product, will be used or suit this consumer better?
The answer to this is a function that is necessary for your organization in the overall structure of the company management, a function called marketing research.
Usually, it is difficult to make a decision whether to conduct research yourself or to order it from a third-party professional organization called the Agency for Marketing Research.
I want to tell you that there are two ways and two possibilities for an organization. Of course, an analytical function should be provided to any company in the marketing service, but an analytical function can be used to analyze the internal documentation of companies or external information about the activities of your competitors.
However, conducting a marketing research on your own, obtaining information from your consumers, is a rather difficult activity that requires professional skills.
It requires the ability of the organization to use the abilities and capabilities of professional interviewers in order to find the consumer, to persuade him, to motivate him to answer, to invite him to participate in the transmission of this information.
And most importantly, to analyze the information obtained and to draw certain conclusions and recommendations that can be used by managers and companies in order to make effective management decisions.
This discipline is taught at all levels. It is taught to students at the bachelor's level who specialize in marketing.
It is taught to students at the master's level who specialize in marketing.
This discipline is taught at the level of the program of professional retraining in the field of marketing or the program of the Master of Business Administration, that is, the MBA program, where listeners receive retraining in order to improve their own career in the field of marketing.
I must say that this discipline combines knowledge from different fields of science. This is, first of all, marketing and management.
Second, it is mathematics and statistics, since mathematical and statistical analysis and tools are used to deduce statistically significant data in order to make conclusions and make decisions.
Among other things, the basis of this discipline is knowledge from the field of psychology, sociology. Moreover, the tools of sociological research or research of society, research of trends in society are very often used in marketing research.
Experts who work in marketing research, most often in marketing research agencies, have a basic education in sociology or marketing.
Experts who work in marketing research, most often in marketing research, have a basic education in sociology or marketing.
If we talk about foreign literature, translated literature, which has appeared and is widely presented in Russian bookshelves, then the book, perhaps, number one in the field of marketing research can be called the book of a famous author, a famous professor in the field of marketing research, which is called Marketing Research.
The author is Neresh Malhotra. This book is quite popular. This is evidenced by the fact that it is already the second edition in Russia. In 2003, the third edition of this book was published, and in 2006, the fourth edition of this book was published.
The fourth edition is used in English. Today, it is used by experts in foreign marketing research.
The book, which was published in the St. Petersburg edition, is the book of two famous marketing authors, David Acker and Verna Kumara, Marketing Research, 2005.
Among other things, there are authors, including domestic, who write about marketing research from the point of view of their own experience and the implementation of research projects or their own specializations in the field of research.
For example, Belyaevsky, who most often writes in his books and articles about the use of high-quality marketing research, or the magnificent book by Olga Melnikova, Focus Group in Marketing Research, which is full of both theories and practical examples of conducting focus groups, deep interviews, and the use of design technologies in the experience of practical research.
The public organizations that are created and function successfully in Russia contribute a lot to the dissemination of knowledge on marketing research.
First of all, we should pay tribute to the President and the Guild of Marketologists, which distributes knowledge, holds open seminars on marketing research and other marketing problems in Russia.
The book by Igor Berezin, Marketing Research, as it is done in Russia, is written in such an accessible language that he calls it not a textbook, but a reflection or a collection of the author's own ideas about how the program is planned, carried out, and the marketing research is analyzed.
Many methods of conducting marketing research are presented in the periodical press, both in business press and academic press, including in the magazines Marketing of Russia Abroad, Marketing and Marketing Research, the magazine Industry and Advertising, and others.
The entire list of literature is presented in the course program that you have on hand. Now I would like to ask the listeners, please, how do you feel about marketing research? Do you have a negative perception of the information that comes from marketing research projects?
I am sure that the audience can be divided either in half, or in the percentage ratio of 80 to 20, and 80% of listeners will say that marketing research is often not used in any way, or, even worse, marketing research does not help to make effective decisions.
My answer to this objection is either the process of collecting information was not organized correctly, or you hired the wrong agency that claimed that it could conduct research, conduct a project at a high quality level,
and in the end this project did not receive due attention, and you do not trust the information that was collected with the help of this research project.
I must tell you that 80% of successful companies abroad and in Russia use the results of marketing research. This is evidenced by the fact that the research industry is growing, and in recent years the market for marketing services has grown by almost 50%.
This fact is registered and is widely spread with the help of marketologists who conduct annual surveys of experts in the field of marketing to assess how the market for marketing services is growing.
If we say that the basis of this discipline is serious and accurate science, then new computer technologies affect the conduct of marketing research.
The Internet and information technologies become not only an assistant for conducting research, an assistant for communication between the customer of the research and its performer, but the opportunities of the Internet set tasks for finding respondents, motivating respondents to participate in surveys that are conducted in remote access.
This is not the case when neither the interviewer nor the respondent sees each other, because the respondent fills out the survey on his computer.
Development of information technologies allows for the quick and high-quality processing of the data. Imagine that you have a mass of 750, or more, surveys.
The possibilities of various packages and computer programs give you a wide range of data. For example, the comparison of the answers of these 750 respondents to various questions.
This is possible with the help of cross-tabulation analysis, that is, the analysis of the answers to various questions of the survey. Such opportunities are given by various information technologies.
These technologies allow to look at and, moreover, to bring the data so that the analyst himself sees how close the correlation of answers to questions about income levels and preferences for certain types of products of respondents.
More complex packages of computer programs developed by foreign developers, for example, the most famous package of computer programs, which is used by almost all well-known marketing agencies, is the SPSS package, Statistical Package for Social Sciences.
The marketing research discipline consists of five sections. The first section is the concept and the program of conducting marketing research.
The first topic is the process of conducting marketing research, types, types, classification of research, basic definitions. Let's start with it.
The American Marketing Association, the leading association that unites professionals in the field of marketing, teachers in the field of marketing, professionals in conducting marketing research, defines marketing research as follows.
Marketing research is a management function that connects the manufacturer with the market through information. The key words in this definition are as follows.
Marketing research is a management function that connects the manufacturer with the market through information. For what purposes is marketing research needed?
Marketing research is needed to identify market opportunities or problems. Marketing research is not always conducted because there is a problem with the market, with the reduction of sales volume or with the shift of your consumers' attention.
Marketing research is often needed when it is necessary to determine the possibilities of expanding the business for the company, or the opportunities for offering a new product to the market.
Or, for example, when the company needs to carry out fashionable processes, which are called re-branding, re-positioning. Thus, information is needed to determine market opportunities and problems.
Information is also needed to evaluate or monitor the company's own marketing activities. This is why the information obtained through marketing research projects comes not only from the market, but also from within the company.
Marketing research is also needed to understand that marketing is not a one-time event. Marketing is a long-term strategy, processes that take place in the company, that help the company for market activity.
These processes are considered by marketers and other specialists in the company as investment processes, as processes aimed at long-term period of success of the company or products.
Russian authors also define marketing research in a different way.
Key phrases and key words in such definitions are the words that denote the management function, analysis, interpretation of marketing data, acceptance of opportunities and problems, as well as the reduction of the risk associated with management decisions.
In the theory of management decisions, which are widely used by marketers and analysts, it is always said that management decisions are always associated with risks.
The person making the decision, the LPR, always takes risks. For example, the decision that will be optimistic or pessimistic, or the attempt to find a compromise alternative solution between optimistic and pessimistic.
And to expect how great or low the risks associated with these decisions will be.
What are the types and methods of marketing research? What is the algorithm of the marketing research project? This is discussed in the first section of our course.
General classification of marketing research.
The solution of these problems or the achievement of the solutions that are intended for the operational level or the tactical level.
Research aimed at determining the problem is related to the analysis, assessment, determination of market potential.
The most important and extremely painful topic that always interests all practitioners is the determination of the market share or the share of our competitors.
The determination of the characteristics of the market, the determination of the opportunities for the development of this market, or the characteristics of the market that indicate that the market is in a state of stagnation and there are no more opportunities for growth.
This is what has happened in recent years with the Russian mobile phone market.
Sales analysis, which is based on internal data of the company.
Sales forecasting or forecasting of the market development, market opportunities.
Research of the main business trends.
Very often Russian entrepreneurs invite consultants or marketing researchers and say, please tell me which way our business should move, which niche should be occupied in order to be successful and ensure this success for yourself in the near future.
For example, recently in one of the MBA groups I had a student, a listener, who recently took on the responsibilities of a marketing analyst in a large publishing house.
The main business of the publishing house is the publishing of newspapers and magazines.
She works in a publishing house that publishes newspapers and magazines.
The main sales and financial flows that come to the organization are the flows from advertisers who place their advertising in these publications.
In order to plan the company's activities and forecast these financial flows, it is necessary to know exactly which potential advertisers, which potential manufacturers of goods and services should be addressed.
Today, the most often advertised products are printed media, cosmetics, perfumes, watches, clothes.
But how long will this situation last? Should we work with future manufacturers that will produce niche goods?
How persistently should we cooperate with them to ensure the future financial flows of the organization?
Research that is aimed at solving the problem. First of all, research that concerns how to divide the market into homogeneous segments with the same characteristics of the consumer segment.
That is, the segmentation analysis. And, of course, research, research methods that are aimed at obtaining the information necessary for making operational marketing decisions on the elements of the marketing complex.
These are research related to products, development and introduction of new products, testing of these products, determining the possibilities and perception of our product consumers.
Research of the promotion complex and the research of the marketing communication complex. How effective are they economically? How quickly do these marketing communications affect the financial profits of the company?
On the one hand, and on the other hand, how are they connected with the communication efficiency of marketing communications? Special marketing studies are aimed at determining this economic and communication efficiency of advertising and other means of communication.
And, of course, research that is aimed at determining the efficiency of the distribution of your product, not only logistics, but also the efficiency of distribution channels, including retail channels, wholesale channels,
determination of the intensity of sales, the number of products that have entered the market, which is sold along with your competitors, and so on.
Thus, in the general form, marketing studies are divided into two large blocks. Studies that are aimed at determining the problems or market opportunities that are necessary for obtaining information to make decisions at the strategic level.
And studies that are aimed at solving problems, and studies that are aimed at making decisions at the operational level.
If we talk about the stages of work with the client, about the stages of interaction between the marketing agency and the customer, then in theory and in practice there are 5 main stages of the marketing study project.
At the first stage, the problem is determined, or, again, the market opportunity. At the second stage, the research plan is developed. At the third stage, the collection of necessary information is carried out, which always begins with the collection of secondary information, with the conduct of office research, which sometimes is enough to draw recommendations and proposals for improving the company's activities.
Or, office research and field research are combined, when secondary information is collected while sitting at the computer, from reading statistical data and obtaining primary information from industry experts or respondents, directly from listeners.
At the fourth stage, the analysis of the activity is carried out, the analysis of the information obtained through office and field research, as well as the choice of the optimal solution to the problem from the alternatives that may arise during the analysis of the information.
And finally, the fifth stage, which does not always take place in practice. The fifth stage is the implementation of marketing events. In fact, this is the level of decision-making by the organization itself, the management of the organization, based on the information obtained through the marketing study project.
However, in the areas of research activities, the task of establishing long-term partnership relationships with the customer is often set.
What do long-term partnership relationships mean between a research agency and a customer? This means that the agency would like to call itself not just a marketing research agency, but a consulting agency that can help with the help of consulting projects in the implementation of these marketing events.
On the slide you can see what the main stages of interaction can be at different stages of implementation of the marketing study project between the client, the customer of marketing studies and the marketing study agency.
The stage of approval of the project, the stage of launching the project and the stage of data analysis and presentation of the project to the customer.
The customer, as well as the consumer, in this case the client, the manufacturer of goods and services, acts as a consumer of information, a consumer of the marketing study project and can dictate its conditions.
First of all, he can dictate his conditions by organizing a so-called tender for conducting marketing studies, when a brief or a request for conducting marketing studies, which is written by the customer, is sent to several organizations, several well-known agencies.
In this case, the marketing study agency, which receives this information on the request for conducting the project, should make a response document called a proposal for conducting marketing studies or a research proposal.
We will talk about this a little later.
About the content of the request and proposal for conducting marketing studies.
In any case, the brief will only be successful when the organization of the tender, the organization of the competition for obtaining the right to conduct a marketing study will be successful only when the customer company will state in this brief in sufficient detail the history of its company, the problem that the company faces,
as well as try to state the possible conditions for conducting a marketing study project, the terms, the methods that can be used in this project.
And, in the end, the client has the right to choose which of the contractors, which of the marketing study agencies can win this tender.
At the launch of the project, additional information can be received from the client.
After the contract for conducting a marketing study project has been signed, the client can change the conditions of the project in some way, clarify the tasks for conducting a marketing study,
specify the volumes of the selection, the number of respondents to be interviewed, or the number of focus groups to be conducted for collecting quality information.
The client is responsible for providing motivating or stimulating materials that will then be transmitted to the respondents in order to motivate them to participate in the research project.
The marketing study agency at this stage is responsible for developing the tool, that is, developing a professional questionnaire and conducting its piloting,
that is, the approval of this questionnaire and testing it at small selections, at respondents who are representatives of the target audience, target group, target segment of your project.
At the same time, to save time and money, this audience is not very large, the number of respondents is not high.
At this stage, the agency is responsible for collecting primary data, for collecting and organizing fieldwork.
At the third stage of the interaction between the client and the marketing study agency, joint development of decision-making on the analysis of the information received, preparation of the interim report, preparation of the final report after the account of the client's comments, and, in the end, presentation and transfer of information to the client.
I must tell you right away that the information package, information services at this stage cease to be the property of the marketing study agency and are transferred as intellectual property to the client, who pays for these projects.
In this case, the client company that orders marketing studies must understand its own risks. It must understand that in the research agency with this company, with this project, some manager works, who is responsible for a specific key client, Key Account Manager, that is, for your client company.
In this case, everything is fine until this manager works in this company.
Since the flow of personnel in research companies is quite high, many account managers in research companies would like to develop their careers, switch to other positions, or leave the company and move to the client's side, because marketing has many different options for career development.
In this case, unfortunately, it is difficult to guide the process of information leakage from a specific research project. Companies must take this into account when drafting contracts for the non-disclosure of commercial secrets and marketing information.
Nevertheless, there are and remain facts when the information leakage about the activities of marketing or business of specific manufacturers of goods and services occurs from marketing research agencies.
If we talk about the communication process between the research agency and the client, or rather, between the client and the research agency, then both sides must prepare two different documents.
I have already mentioned the document called the brief or the request for conducting a research. Now I will talk about the document that is essentially a document for selling marketing research services.
This is a research proposal. On the Russian market, and especially among Russian marketing research companies, this document is still called a technical task, as it was in the old Soviet times and in the early and mid-1990s.
In general, a request and a proposal are a way of communication between the client and the research agency. The main task of the brief is to explain to the agency what problem is intended to be solved, and the main task of the proposal is to explain to the client what the proposed research will give him, that is, to sell his services.
If we talk about other research, which, in addition to research aimed at the study of strategic marketing institutions of companies or operational institutions of marketing activities of companies,
research agencies can propose a number of methods that allow them to be grouped in a research direction, which is called the study of consumers.
Consumers are the market or target audience of the company, and are in the focus of all marketing activities of the company, the manufacturer of goods and services, and in the focus of attracting their attention to the research agency.
The study of consumers in the following main areas, which are extremely important for determining the profile of the target audience.
Demography, economic, social and behavioral factors. It is well known that the use of social, demographic and economic factors for segmentation of the market is no longer enough for the purposes of manufacturers and marketing agencies.
It is necessary to know exactly not only how many consumers with higher education live in Moscow or live in the city of Krasnodar, it is necessary to clarify how many professional marketers live in Moscow in order to assess the market proposal on the labor market.
It is necessary to assess how many of this cohort of marketers who offer their services on the labor market prefer, for example, a free style of clothing, that is, demonstrate some certain behavioral characteristics, or prefer certain tourist routes.
Or how many of them prefer so-called branded goods, as the latest studies of the lifestyle and consumption of the middle class say.
The information that consumers give about their perception of the quality of goods and services is extremely important in the research.
And also the study of the factors of past experience of using products and services. For what purposes is this information intended and what decisions can be made based on this information?
In the first place, the study of the lifestyle of consumers, their values and problems, gives manufacturers the opportunity to think about the strategy of positioning their products in order to offer products not only at the optimal price or at a lower price compared to competitors,
but also to offer our consumers information about the value of the product that is intended at this price for a specific group of consumers.
For example, the Danone company, which in November 2007 released a new dairy product with the content of special bacteria that contribute to the reduction of cholesterol, says that this product, this brand is called Danacor,
says that not only is this product intended for the older generation, older than 40 years, who have problems with cholesterol in their blood, which in turn affect the health of these people,
but the company states in its advertising and communication messages that this product is positioned as a product that is intended to support the healthy lifestyle of this category, this target segment of consumers.
If we talk about the factors of past experience of using goods and services, then now each of you can remember how you first bought a computer or a car, were you satisfied or dissatisfied with this computer or car manufacturer.
And if you had a positive experience of using this brand, these design features, it means that your next computer, which needs to be replaced, replace this product of long-term use with another, more modern model,
does it mean that you will buy a computer based on a positive past experience in the same brand of the same manufacturer, or you will switch to another manufacturer's brand, because not only your positive experience, but also other marketing efforts have influenced you.
For example, the transfer of experience of your colleagues, friends, or other people whom we call opinion leaders, or a strictly aggressive marketing policy of competitors that other brands of computers produce, and so on.
And finally, in consumer research, we aim to include in the questionnaire questions that consumers ask about the future consumption, about the intention of consumption of products and services.
For example, how many times a year do you travel, and are you going to travel to the Far East, or to Japan, or to some other exotic countries in the next six months or three months.
These questions about future intentions allow us to predict the situation with the preferences of consumers, the demand of consumers for certain destinations or for certain directions of tourist flows, which become extremely interesting for tourist companies.
As I said, the relationship between the customer and the performer of the marketing research project is regulated by special agreements for providing information services.
The basis of this agreement is always a technical task or an offer to conduct a marketing research, which is prepared by the performer or the agency of marketing research, as well as a brief, a request for conducting a research, which is prepared by the customer, the organization, the manufacturer of goods and services, which is most often the customer of the research.
The agreement must include a marketing research program or a scheme that is based on the process of collection, analysis and interpretation of the desired information.
This program must include not only the stages of conducting a marketing research, which we touched on a little bit in the slide where we talked about the relationship between the research agency and the customer, but also some intermediate stages, as well as the budget determination, the main restrictions on conducting a marketing research,
which is the budget determination, that is, the money and the time restrictions on conducting a research project.
The marketing research program includes several stages. The first is the setting of the goals of the research, listing of hypotheses that will be tested. A little later we will talk about what is meant by the word hypothesis and what hypotheses can be developed for conducting marketing research, so that they can be tested during the research project.
The second stage is the determination of methods or tools used for collecting marketing information, the determination of the specifications of the terms and conditions used, because we must report to ourselves, despite the fact that you, as marketers working in practice or as specialists who then read marketing reports, of course,
you already have marketing terminology or marketing terminology, and at the same time you do not always know specific terms, for example, the analysis or use of tools for analyzing marketing information, or you have forgotten a little bit since the moment of training.
In this regard, all points of emphasis should be placed between the two highly negotiated parties, between the customer and the performer, in terms of an accurate and equal understanding of all terms, abbreviations and specific definitions that will be used in a specific research project.
A list of variables and methods of measuring each variable is also defined. For example, if we are talking about the age of the buyer or the respondent who will be interviewed, there are several ways to determine the age of our target audience.
The first way is to ask questions to the forehead, how old are you or how many years have you been at the time of the survey. I give you 100% guarantee that almost no one, especially from the female half of humanity, and they are mainly the main buyers of products and services, will answer this question directly.
It is much easier to answer such questions using various scales of intervals that are set by a research agency when a woman or even a man has the opportunity to choose, for example, between 25 and 45.
Who knows that this person will be 45 years old in a month or a few days. Still, he will fall into this rather spacious audience, which, for example, prefers an active lifestyle and travel without the specific conditions that hospitality services offer.
Then, the marketing research program should describe the procedures of organization of observation or gathering of information. If less clearly defined and structured method of gathering primary information is used, it is necessary to describe how it will be done.
Will it be a direct observation when the respondent sees the researcher? Will it be a so-called hidden observation using a video camera? Or will it be an observation that will be carried out using the staff of the store, not the members of the research team, who will be specially instructed how to conduct the research.
Then, the marketing research program should include the discussion of the future analysis of data. What tools of analysis will be used?
I have already touched on one of the types of analysis, which is called cross-tabulation analysis. That is, the use of cross-tabulation tables in different packages of computer programs that allow to compare data obtained from the answers to different questions of the questionnaire.
For example, age and preference to spend free time. Age, education and dependence on these two parameters. Such a direction of consumption, which is called the consumption of fashionable clothing. Or consumption that will be related to computer games, video consoles and some other fashionable modern information products.
Three more stages of the marketing research program, which are extremely important and which must be discussed and, most importantly, recorded in the contract between the customer and the researcher of the project, are the determination of the terms of the research and the provision of the results.
Now, some of you will definitely ask the question, what are the usual deadlines for conducting a research project? Are there any proposals for the duration of the research projects?
Someone says 4 months, someone says 6 months, someone says 3 weeks. Absolutely right. From the point of view of the customer, the shorter the research project, the more effective it seems. From the point of view of time and financial costs.
However, in three weeks it is almost impossible to organize, collect, analyze qualitatively marketing information. Although such short-term projects take place in certain cases.
Nevertheless, the standard research deadlines usually range from 4 months to 6 months. During this time, there are some relations between the customer and the researcher of the project.
The closer, the denser, the more frequent the communication between the researcher and the customer, the better. Because in this case, the customer constantly knows at what stage the researcher is, who conducts a specific research.
And the researcher, in turn, knows exactly what objections may arise during this period of time from the customer, the manufacturer, who is in a changing market situation.
In the research program, a stage is also included, or a point is also included, which is called the determination of the composition of participants and their qualifications.
Most often, the determination of the composition of participants is recorded in special electronic tables that can be created in the Excel program. These electronic tables record the time stage of the research.
And also, who, what specific specialists will be responsible for conducting a particular stage of the research, who will be included in the team for the project.
And, finally, the determination of the budget for the research. Again, I admire your question, how much does it usually cost to conduct a research?
For example, to determine the relationship and preferences and possibilities of using a product called the USAGE and ATTITUDE research.
Usually, the basis of such research is a long survey of respondents, which takes about an hour. These surveys are conducted either at home, which is not possible in Moscow, but in certain cities where the residents of these cities still trust third-party observers who can come to their house
and ask them questions about their preference for certain types of products and services or how they are used in their household. In Moscow, St. Petersburg and other major cities, such surveys are usually conducted either in offices or respondents are invited to offices of organizations,
which motivates them, of course, while stimulating them with certain stimulating materials. The last item in the marketing research program is the item that interests the customer and the agency the most.
The item is the determination of the budget for the research. The basis of the budget calculation is often a principle that is used for many enterprises that produce services. For example, the hourly rate of employees who participate in this research,
or the hourly rate of use, or the hourly rate of efforts that employees put into the research, or quite often, especially when the basis of the research is the collection of quantitative information in the form of an organization of quantitative surveys of respondents,
the price of one survey is taken as a basis. In Russian practice, the price of one survey ranges from $1 to $2 depending on the complexity of the survey, on the specifics and problems of the research project, and also on the geography of the research.
That is, is this research conducted only in Moscow for Moscow manufacturers of goods and services, or is this research conducted simultaneously in several regions.
For the implementation of research projects, based on which the collection of qualitative information is based, for example, the use of focus groups, the price of conducting one focus group or one in-depth interview is taken as the basis of the project price or budget of the project.
When the organization is included, logistical aspects of the organization of the focus group, for example, the rental of special equipment or the rental of special premises, we will talk about this in the topic of qualitative research.
But it can also be the payment of transport costs for a special moderator, who is invited or who goes to the regions to conduct focus groups. It can also be the payment of personnel, the payment of researchers who are involved in this project, and so on.
The article of the research, the article of these expenses, they are clearly regulated, and usually the price of the project or the budget of the project, its amount is reached through negotiations between the customer and the researcher and is clearly recorded in the contract for the implementation of the project or in the contract for providing information services.
Typical contracts for conducting marketing research projects can be seen in the book by Igor Berezin, Marketing Research, How it is done in Russia.
In my own practice of consulting and conducting marketing research, I also use these forms of typical contracts, which, of course, in each case are changed or adapted to the conditions of the customer on the one hand, and on the other hand are considered by lawyers, both on our side and on the side of the customer.
If we talk about the marketing research program and its five stages, which we have already discussed, the determination of the problem, the development of the plan, the collection of information, the choice of the optimal solution, the problem of the implementation in the life of marketing events,
then at the stage of the development of the research plan, it is necessary to always remember about the time and so-called human limitations, or time, budget and limitations associated with the use of human resources, which can somehow affect the implementation in the life of the marketing research project.
And you need to think about the so-called profitability of the project. Is it worth taking on a research project if the organization is not ready to pay enough money to cover the costs of organizing and collecting information?
Or vice versa, what will be the responsibility for the implementation of a research project, which is expensive, and most importantly, prestigious, from a prestigious customer, if you do not have enough human resources, or you are limited by time limits, or you do not have enough technical resources to implement it?
In fact, the marketing research project always consists of the following stages. The so-called conceptualization, that is, the development of the concept of research and the determination of search questions and hypotheses and problems on which the research is carried out.
Then the coordination between the two negotiating parties. Then the formalization of this process, that is, the description of this process using a contract or using the methods and tools that will be used in the marketing research project.
Then the preparation of the research, the preparation of the questionnaire, its piloting, the changes of this questionnaire if necessary, if some questions of the questionnaire are misunderstood by your respondents, the target group of respondents.
Then the fieldwork. And here the most interesting and creative process begins in the marketing research process. Here is a mass of information that has been obtained using fieldwork.
It is necessary to encode each questionnaire and each answer, each question, in order to see disagreements or limit the incorrect filling of these questionnaires, identify, select those questionnaires that were incorrectly filled,
enter the data of the answers of these questionnaires into the computer program, conduct processing and analysis of these data using various methods of analysis, and, in the end, prepare the report and presentation.
In my practice, I believe that the preparation of the report or presentation of the research project is the most responsible, but at the same time the most difficult stage.
Because if you have been in close contact with the customer during this period of the project, then you can expect any reaction from the customer to the presentation of the results.
But if you have been in contact with only one person from the customer's company, and the presentation of the project will be attended by management, members of the marketing department, or members of other organizations, employees of other departments of the company,
then it is quite possible that you will face some objections or even disapproval of the conclusions and results of your research, because employees of your organization often look at third-party consultants or researchers.
How can this be overcome? First of all, you need to be sure that the quality, representative and valid information collected in this report is the basis.
And most importantly, you need to know the results of this research very well and report on them in detail. Or describe it all in a written report on the research.
In my practice, there were several successful and a small number of unsuccessful presentations of marketing research reports. I want to tell you about one case.
The company of the Russian Academy of Sciences took part in a research project, based on which a research tool called Holtest was used to assess the effectiveness of a recently completed advertising campaign by a manufacturer that produces consumer goods under the SKID brand on the Moscow market.
274 surveys were collected, a large number of such studies. The research project was carried out immediately after the completion of the advertising campaign, which the manufacturer paid for and placed on the first two central channels of Moscow Central Television.
Respondents were invited to conduct research from the street near the Mayakovskaya subway station, to the cinema in the Khanzhonkov house, to demonstrate them again, and then determine the preferences, loyalty, knowledge of the brands of mayonnaise that are on the Moscow market.
As you understand, the target audience for this product is quite wide. Most often, these are women who are engaged in household chores. I do not say housewives, because these are women who work, who are engaged in household chores, cooking food.
The company was designed with the help of an advertising agency and placed on the central television.
When this study was carried out, the results were analyzed, a report was made on the study. We went to present the results of this research project to the company's customer.
We contacted the commercial director of this manufacturer, a well-developed and well-educated person. However, there were many specialists at the presentation, including the president of the company, the head and the owner.
During the presentation, which lasted about 30 minutes, all the main results of the study were presented. It was clear how the listeners react, either by asking questions or by offering their own forms of decision-making.
The presentation was positive. It was clear that the customer liked our research, and most importantly, that they saw new conceptual conclusions that they did not know about their target audience, preferences, loyalty to their brand, perception of this brand by consumers.
Only one person was silent. When the last point was set, when we said that we were ready to answer all the questions, this person, who was an analyst of the marketing department, asked us a question that put us in a deadlock.
Why was a specific method of research used in this project? Why the whole test? Why not home surveys? He said that a few years ago he personally collected 150 surveys, interviewing housewives who lived near the factory.
Imagine a situation when two years ago researchers and employees tried to invite respondents who were at home after a hard working day, and then on a trip to the subway or in Moscow traffic jams, to a survey about the perception of the brand, the use of the mayonnaise brand at home.
Who will open the closed door of the entrance or the door of the apartment? Almost no one. I think that the percentage of responses in such a survey will be zero.
So, we had to answer, but the danger of this objection affecting the perception of the results of the research project remained. Nevertheless, the management thinks positively and logically, and therefore agreed with how we collected the information.
Continuing our lecture, we are talking about the types of marketing research clients that apply to research agencies. Most orders come from companies that produce goods and services.
Most orders come from companies that produce goods and services. These orders are called ad hoc research, from the Latin word made by order. Of course, this does not necessarily apply to research in the Latin language, but for some reason this term is most used in the research business.
Other customers of marketing research are marketing research companies that order the assessment of advertising tests, the assessment of the effectiveness of advertising.
These companies are considered advertising agencies, they are the customers of the research projects, and in turn, their customers are paid for conducting such research by the company that produces goods and services.
Another customer that can become a customer for conducting research projects is a consulting agency that is engaged in the implementation of consulting projects in the field of business restructuring, the determination of the direction of activity of individual companies, including marketing, and so on.
They usually order specific strategic projects, projects in the field of B2B market coordination for corporate customers, or projects for the development of concepts or prototypes of new products.
In turn, a consulting agency has its main contractor, a customer who is the same company that produces goods and services.
And finally, the last type of customers of marketing research can be another agency of marketing research that does not have specific research tools in its arsenal.
For example, small research agencies or regional research agencies that need to conduct research in Moscow or in another region. Or research agencies that cannot and do not have qualifications in the field of conducting research related to determining the elasticity of demand for a price or determining the sensitivity to a price.
By the way, this type of research is specialized by individual companies that produce marketing research that are related to network marketing agencies or so-called full-cycle agencies.
We say that both in our lectures and in practice, most often in the research business, two people are involved in the interaction. These are the marketing research agencies and the company that produces goods and services.
Another point that I already said a little bit about is the ad hoc, from the Latin, intended for a specific purpose. This is a one-time research that is carried out at the request of the client.
It is carried out by waves with a certain repeating frequency, for example, twice a year or once a year. These studies include various types of monitoring, for example, monitoring of retail trading or analysis of lifestyle, which is still carried out by the research company Expert.RA.
Research of social classes, various types of panel research, the most famous of which is the research that has been initiated and carried out since 1996 by the Comcon company under the license of the Research International company,
which is a research on the lifestyle and consumption of the Russian audience, called the Russian target group index. As a result of conducting syndicated or standard research, huge databases are created that are sold as a whole or as separate selection for subscribers who subscribe to these studies.
That is, there is no specific customer behind the conduct of this research. Such a research can then be sold as a whole or in its separate parts, for example, research on the preferences of consumers living in the central economic region on the category of products called chocolate sweets.
Such a research can be interesting for chocolate candy manufacturers located in Moscow or other regions that intend to penetrate the central region.
Now we will talk a little about the information and data obtained using marketing studies. First of all, we must draw a certain distinction between what is data and what is information.
At first glance, many listeners or managers do not see the difference between these two concepts, and often these two concepts are used as synonyms. Nevertheless, we say that data and information have differences in terms of their definition and in terms of the attitude to the adoption of marketing decisions.
Data is unstructured, undetermined data that, of course, has a certain value, a certain value for the company. Nevertheless, it is just the volume, the scale, the numbers, statistics, data about sales, data from competitors that can enter the information base, the information system of the organization, and which without special processing do not bear a specific value.
While the information that can be obtained based on the analysis of these data has a more structured form, reduces the uncertainty that predisposes and reduces the risk of making management decisions.
And in this regard, due to its structuring and reduction of uncertainty, it has its own value and value. Information that becomes important for various types of organizations or functional units within the organization that use this information.
For example, if we now imagine the functional structure of the company management, if we talk about the main areas of activity in different departments that are part of the management of this company, then we can highlight such main functional areas of activity as production, finance, human resources, of course, as information technologies, marketing, sales.
And logistic operations, for example. In some organizations, especially those that produce and offer innovative products to the market, or products that are constantly being updated, there are also departments called research and development.
Research, in which scientific, technological, engineering personnel accumulate, who are engaged in the development of concepts of new innovative products.
They are engaged in research and direction of financial flows within the organization. They are engaged in the direct production of products, the storage of this product, and the shipment to consumers.
They are engaged in contacts with consumers. This is the sales department. And still, of all the listed units, the only department that carries out an analytical function and is engaged in the analysis of external incoming information and the analysis of the external environment is the marketing department.
From the marketing department to the production department, information can be received about the preferences of consumers, about the claims of consumers to certain characteristics of the product, to certain attributes of the product.
And in turn, from the production department to the marketing department, information is received about the number of produced products, about the characteristics of certain items or the names of the categories of products that are produced, and so on.
From the marketing department, information is received about the prices for the products of competitors, in order to analyze the cost of the product, as well as to determine flexible prices that will be competitive to competitors.
From the financial department to the marketing department, information is received about the cost of the product, about the constant and variable costs and opportunities for the use of various price strategies, depending on the stage of the life cycle of the product or how it is positioned in relation to competitors.
From the logistics department to the marketing department, information is received about the quantity and composition of the produced products, about the assortment of the produced products.
From the logistics department to the marketing department, information is received about the quantity of the products that are stored in warehouses, or, on the contrary, which type of products is more in demand, and which type of products requires intervention or the creation of special marketing programs for their promotion.
Data and information are different. Data has a lower value and cost for the company. It is an unstructured volume of various information, various data, facts and figures that are received by the analytical department of the company.
As a result of the data processing process and adding additional values to this data in the form of structuring, in the form of reducing uncertainty, their value increases, and this data takes the form of marketing information, which is the basis for making marketing decisions.
I have a question for you to complete this topic. How are data and information different? Give examples of various types of data that the marketing department can receive, and how can this data be converted into quality and valuable marketing information for the organization?
The answer to this question is very simple. Data can include data from syndicated information or standard research that is purchased from the organization.
For example, you can buy from the research company, the largest and perhaps the most famous company that deals with retail audits or auditing the activities of retail trading enterprises in Russia and Moscow. This company is proudly named AC Nielsen.
This is the representation of the Russian international research company, which operates on absolutely all markets. This company collects information from retail organizations once every two months about what products are being sold, records and scans the data of cash registers,
on the basis of which you can get data about fluctuations in demand for a certain commodity category, about average prices for a commodity category in different trading networks, about an average check per week or an average check on a certain day of the week in order to smooth out periods of surge or drop in demand for certain commodity groups, and so on.
This information, which is received in the form of large, long Excel tables, will be data for a specific manufacturer.
By the way, if we talk about the cost of a full subscription to the AC Nielsen Retail Audit, then such a subscription can cost up to $ 100,000 per year.
This information is not verified and unstructured data, which can be converted into structured data by various methods of selecting the necessary information.
For example, the demand for confectionery products is carried out in trading networks that operate in a discount format, that is, in the format of not very expensive trading networks where your products are presented and at the same time the products of competitors are presented.
From this report, you can crystallize the information that will be necessary to make a decision, for example, whether to produce a new type of marshmallow with certain fruit additives, because such a type of marshmallow has not yet been produced by your company or your competitor companies.
So, we have considered the difference between two important concepts of data and information in marketing research, and we have moved on to the next topic, which is called the marketing information system.
If we talk about the marketing information system, in terms of its conceptualization, the first concept of combining, collecting, analyzing various types of marketing information was proposed by Philip Kotler.
In his first book, which was translated into Russian by the Management of Marketing, published by Economics in 1980, we could see approximately this scheme, this composition of the marketing information system, which I am drawing your attention to, is presented on the slide.
However, this scheme was taken from the latest edition of Kotler's book, the most famous book of Marketing Management, which was published in the 12th edition in the St. Petersburg publishing house.
So, if we talk about the concept of the marketing information system, I will first talk about the concept, and then I will talk about the technical capabilities of the implementation of information systems, which are supported by various developers of information systems.
The customers are located outside the internal content of the information systems of marketing, they are engaged in organizing or ordering a task for programmers and engineers,
they set the task of what needs in the information exist and how the distribution of information from various sources into the information system should be carried out.
The state of information that is accumulated and analyzed and, perhaps, is requested from the information system of marketing is influenced by the external marketing environment, from which information is received in the information system using various tools.
The marketing environment consists of the influence of consumers or opinions, wishes, needs of consumers, determination of the boundaries of target markets, where the enterprise operates or where it wants to go,
information from competitors, information from suppliers, information from distribution channels, as well as information from various media that supply or influence the content of information in the structure of the marketing information system.
In addition, the information about the macro-environment tendencies, on which the company does not influence, should be subordinated to the social, economic, political, regulatory, competitive and technological factors that are outside the company's influence zone.
The essence of the marketing information system consists of the fact that in it, in computer networks, with the help of input of various types of data, information is accumulated, which bears the name and character of internal data,
for example, reports on sales, financial reports, reports on profitability of marketing investments, that is, the ratio of costs for marketing activities and returns from marketing activities.
There is a block of processing and analysis of data, and in this block, with the help of information systems, with the help of information technologies, some mathematical systems are laid down.
These are statistical procedures that allow you to analyze the data obtained from outside or inside the company.
Most often, from the point of view of concept, conceptually, the concept of the approach is laid down in the elements of data analysis and processing, which is called What-If analysis.
What does it mean? With the help of this principle, with the help of this statistical approach, it is possible to analyze the data that is already contained in the information system.
How such a reduction or such a discount will affect the volume of sales or profitability of the company, the so-called financial flows that come from the sale of goods and services.
And the last block of the marketing information system is the specially organized functions of marketing research.
Or such marketing research can be ordered from third-party organizations or conducted by the so-called outsourcing of marketing research.
In any case, the results of such or other projects should be brought into the information system and should be analyzed, because it is the complex of these information blocks that can be the basis for making marketing decisions.
Please note that all these four blocks are closely interconnected and, most importantly, interdependent.
Marketing research can include both internal data analysis from within the company, and this internal data will be of the nature of internal secondary data, as well as external data analysis that comes from the market.
External secondary data is not published for the purpose of a specific research, for example, the research of similar developing markets in order to identify trends.
And also the specially organized collection and analysis of primary data that is carried out within the framework of a research project.
In its general form, Kotler proposes to define the marketing information system as follows.
A set of components or components interconnected with each other, designed to collect, store, process data and distribute information necessary for making decisions, ensuring control and coordination of the company's marketing activities.
If we talk about the developers of corporate information systems that have marketing data or marketing information systems in their blocks,
there are already enough of them in the Russian market, both domestic and foreign developers, first of all Microsoft Business Solutions, or Navision, or some other companies that are developers of software.
Among domestic developers, I would like to highlight the company Kurs, which has developed a special information database that can be easily adapted into corporate information systems.
It is called Marketing Analytics. In its general form, this information system allows to implement various types of projects from the point of view of internal and external data analysis,
such as direction for portfolio analysis, segmentation analysis of consumers, creation and management of marketing databases, regardless of the market of the company, consumer or corporate customers,
whether they are engaged in the production of goods or services. In any case, this system is well integrated into the general corporate management system of the company.